Add design documentation for whole pipeline (#114)
mozilla/gcp-ingestion: docs/differences_from_aws.md

# Differences from AWS Architecture

This document explains how GCP Ingestion differs from the AWS implementation.

> [AWS Data Platform Architecture](https://mana.mozilla.org/wiki/display/SVCOPS/Telemetry+-+Data+Pipeline+Architecture)

Reviewer: This link looks like it's part of the table of contents. I'd move it to the sentence above and give it the text "AWS implementation (mozilla-internal diagram)"

Author: I did this instead, because it felt awkward to include a link description in the sentence:

> This document explains how GCP Ingestion differs from the [AWS Data Platform Architecture](https://mana.mozilla.org/wiki/display/SVCOPS/Telemetry+-+Data+Pipeline+Architecture)

added advantage being that link isn't guaranteed to be a diagram, jason just chose to put all the info into the diagram instead of more words.

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [Replace Heka Message Format with PubSub Message Format](#replace-heka-message-format-with-pubsub-message-format)
- [Replace EC2 Edge with Kubernetes Edge](#replace-ec2-edge-with-kubernetes-edge)
- [Replace Kafka with PubSub](#replace-kafka-with-pubsub)
- [Replace Hindsight Data Warehouse Loaders with Dataflow](#replace-hindsight-data-warehouse-loaders-with-dataflow)
- [Replace S3 with Cloud Storage](#replace-s3-with-cloud-storage)
- [Messages Always Delivered to Message Queue](#messages-always-delivered-to-message-queue)
- [Landfill is Downstream from Message Queue](#landfill-is-downstream-from-message-queue)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Replace Heka Message Format with PubSub Message Format

Heka messages are protobuf, and have a special framing format. PubSub messages

> are newline delimited JSON. The PubSub message format is being used both because

Reviewer: "PubSub messsages are newline delimited JSON" doesn't sound right to me. The GCS files we store will be in ndjson format, but a Pubsub message itself does not necessarily contain JSON, and even when it does, it's probably a single json message rather than ndjson.

Perhaps this secion should be framed as "Replace Heka Message Format with Compressed Pubsub-formatted JSON"

Author: part of the problem is that the heka message format and the pubsub message format aren't actually what's being swapped out here. it's heka framed protobuf vs compressed ndjson, and the json schema varies. i'll update this section to reflect that.

it works well with PubSub and also because it can be read using Dataflow the
same way from PubSub and Cloud Storage with minimal effort.

## Replace EC2 Edge with Kubernetes Edge

The AWS data platform uses EC2 instances running an NGinX module to encode HTTP

> requests as Heka messages, writes them to Kafka using librdkafka and directly to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requests as Heka messages, writing them to Kafka using librdkafka and directly to
```

Author: counter-suggestion: 
```suggestion
requests as Heka messages and then write them to Kafka using librdkafka and directly to
```

Reviewer: that's fine.

files on disk. librdkafka handles buffering and batching when writing to Kafka.
Files on disk are rotated with cron and uploaded to S3. On shutdown files are
forcefully rotated and uploaded. The sizing of the EC2 instance cluster is
effectively static, but is configured to scale up if needed.

The EC2 instances have been replaced with a Kubernetes cluster. This decision
was made by the Cloud Operations team to simplify operational support for them.

The NGinX module has been replaced by an HTTP service running in Docker. A

> number of factors informed the decision to rewrite the edge, including:

Reviewer: The "including:" here makes it feel like there should be another level of nesting here and we should have level 3 headings

## Replace Kafka with PubSub

Comparison:

|                | Kafka in AWS                    | PubSub                      |
|----------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Managed by     | Ops                             | Google                      |

> | Access control | Security groups, all-or-nothing | Cloud IAM, per-topic        |

Reviewer: Kafka does support per-topic ACLs, but I imagine it was too complex for us to easily take advantage of.

Author: I updated the header for this column to "Kafka in AWS Data Pipeline" to indicate that this isn't a kafka limitation, it's an "our kafka setup" limitation

| Scaling        | Manual                          | Automatic                   |
| Cost           | Per EC2 instance                | Per GB, min charge 1 KB/req |

> | Data Storage   | 2-3 days, depends on throughput | 7 days for unacknowledged   |

Reviewer: 2-3 days here is again something we configured, not a limitation of Kafka as a technology. 

Perhaps the important difference is that storage is fixed and exhaustible for Kafka, but auto-scaling for PubSub.

Author: I changed this to "Configured in GB per EC2 instance" because I feel like that cuts to the heart of the issue. PubSub's advantage is that it's an amount of time, not storage.

They are equivalent products for the different cloud vendors.

## Messages Always Delivered to Message Queue

In AWS the edge aimed to ensure messages were always delivered to either Kafka
or landfill, and in the case of an outage one could be backfilled from the
other. On GCP the Kubernetes edge aims to ensure messages are always delivered
to PubSub. This ensures that consumers from PubSub never miss data unless they
fall too far behind. It also allows landfill to be handled downstream from
PubSub (see below).

## Landfill is Downstream from Message Queue

In AWS, the failsafe data store was upstream of the message queue (Kafka). On
GCP, the failsafe data store is downstream from the message queue (PubSub).

This makes the edge and Dataflow landfill loader simpler. The edge doesn’t have
to ensure that pending messages are safely offloaded on shutdown, because
messages are only left pending when PubSub is unavailable, and scaling down is
disabled while messages are pending. The Dataflow landfill loader doesn’t have
to ensure pending messages are safely offloaded because it only acks messages
after they are uploaded, ensuring at least once delivery.

> This design is possible because of two changes from AWS. First, the Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design is possible because of two changes compared to our AWS implementation. First, the Kubernetes
```
